prime minister thanks for your time and
welcome to CNBC thank you for having me
prime minister we meet at the world
economic Forum here in dvos and there is
a lot on the agenda including domestic
policy in Pakistan as we meet you are
currently among the longest serving keka
prime ministers in the country's history
why has it taken so long for you to
allow the people of Pakistan to decide
their own political future well it's not
about the current government that they
have uh making it they have made it
decision to deny that opportunity for
the people of Pakistan to go into the
elections and elect a mandated
government for them it was for uh all
the the legal and Technical challenges
which we were facing over there uh
related to The Electoral procedures and
processes and uh eventually we got over
with them and hopefully on the 8th of
February Pakistan's people would be
having this choice and they would EX it
you say hopefully do you pledge to hold
the election on February 8th it's not
about my pledge it's a constitutional
requirement it has to happen so of
course uh everyone is committed towards
that thing it's also your job as
caretaker prime minister to ensure that
the country goes to an election will it
happen on February 8th uh that's what
exactly I'm saying and this is what I'm
reiterating that it's a constitutional
requirement and everyone in the country
is committed towards that particular day
and pakist
and Pakistani people would have a chance
to exercise their uh right to vote and
they would elect another government for
for themselves for next 5 years prime
minister as you'll appreciate there is
deep concern in Pakistan at the moment
about the freeness and fairness of this
upcoming election particularly after the
jailing of the former prime minister
Imran Khan and most recently the Banning
of his Party symbol can you address
those concerns well uh the fairness and
the fre are always subjective matters
and uh you know Pakistan is a
transitional democracy and in the whole
of of the region and particularly in the
south Asia Eastern Europe to an extent
and a few other regions also these
transitional democracies they do face uh
domestic challenges I'm not saying we
are living in a settled ideal uh
democracy where where all the standards
even on the Western Hemisphere those
standards are being question
and uh those uh uh the the quantum or
the uh what we call as a parameter for
the fairness is questioned even on in
those countries where there are settled
democracies but yes there are concerns
but we'll try that as much as we can to
give a chance to the people uh so they
can elect their future leadership in a
very fair manner I'm sure the people of
Pakistan would agree though that they
cannot necessarily be held to a
different standard to an election in the
West for example and as it stands one of
the Count's most popular leaders in its
history is in jail the Electoral symbol
that he uses for his party has been
changed and the date of the election has
been delayed so how does that meet
International standards for fairness
well uh he's not jailed for his
political opinions he's uh jailed for uh
his alleged Ro in uh committing riots
and and encouraging arons and
encouraging his followers towards the
disruptions so these sort of behaviors
are dealt with law even in the settled
democracies what happened when the
people attacked uh on 4th of January
probably on Capital Hill and the kind of
a Judicial outcome was there where the
people had to face uh the prison
imprisonment and and rest of the uh
penalties is associated with it this is
the same sort of analogy that you are
having or seeing uh back home in
Pakistan the people who have been
involved in the rights are behind the
bars it's not that the innocent people
have been picked up for their political
opinion and they have been denied a
political role or or being part of that
process so I don't see that as an unfair
me Khan says these charges are
politically motivated to keep him off
the ballot that's fine he has all the
right to say that but let the courts
decide that it's not for me or for Media
or for the public opinion to decide this
question whether that has happened it
has been framed or not so the courts are
there to addressed all these questions
critics also say this is likely the most
rigged election in Pakistan's history so
why should we trust you oh well first
they said we're not going to have
elections now when we are having an
election there saying oh it's one of the
most rigged election in the history let
the elections happen and then there
would be International observers there
would be domestic media reporting it
there would be International media would
be reporting it and let them then report
and decide whether it was a rigged or
not that rigged election is the media
free and fair in Pakistan though I think
so even Freer Freer uh than than the
Western media if you do the comparison
uh the Western media probably is under
more stricter
regulations uh than than the media in
Pakistan I wanted to ask you about the
economic outcomes as well the World Bank
has warned that the uncertainty
surrounding the elections in Pakistan
May hamper foreign investment or even
put your IMF funding package at risk do
you accept that there is significant
economic uncertainty stemming from the
uncertainty surrounding the elections I
don't know from very this assessment is
coming but on 11th well oh okay but on
11th of January the IMF board has
approved our second trch and all those
speculation regarding the elections have
been addressed everyone is certain about
the election date uh on 8th of February
and I think so that's going to lead
towards a stable government and which
would translate into economic stability
I do see and project uh that probably
thought there wouldn't be a great growth
rate in Pakistan but there would be a
sense of stability it would be slow but
it would be sustainable when it comes to
the economic numbers here inflation
climbed to almost 30% in December so a
double- digigit number there and nearly
40% of pakistanis as well are living in
poverty again according to the World
Bank the country's economic prospects
have been dire for quite a long time so
in your view what will the next
government of Pakistan need to do in
order to improve the living standards of
everyday pakistanis and why has this not
become more of a domestic issue for you
in your caretaker role well it was a top
priority to bring the economic Revival
and and focus on on the growth and the
rest of the uh economic indicators for
the next government I think so if there
has to be a clear principle which would
be guiding their or which should be
guiding the their behavior is to earn
more and spend less uh until unless
there is uh spending or the expenditure
side of the government which needs a
thorough rationalization and the revenue
generation needs to be focused uh we
need to revamp our taxation system it is
badly redundant uh we need to bring back
the non-documented economy into
documented economy and uh transform our
state St to a a more viable economic
entity so how do you do that well we uh
would be publishing our white paper what
we did in last four to five months uh we
did uh introduce the uh revamp program
within the taxation system we brought a
structural changes to that that's going
to pass through the cabinet uh probably
by the end of the month and it would be
in placed as policy uh we went for
aggressive privatization spree uh we cut
a few of the uh government expenditures
at the federal level we are trying to
talk to the provinces also so they can
also rationalize uh their sping so there
were many uh areas uh in which the ker
government did focus and did deliver on
the issue of foreign policy and security
and in particular domestic security
Pakistan has seen a very sharp rise in
Terrorist suicide attacks you have said
recently that that was because of the
taliban's return to power in Afghanistan
after the US withdrawal in
2021 do you blame the Biden
Administration for that no I do not
blame anyone for anything it is the uh
situation and the circumstan in which we
are living uh and we did foresee that
there would be uh implications for
Pakistan when the US and NATO withdrawal
would happen happen and that's why
Pakistan was advocating for a
responsible withraw uh but at the same
time we do we do appreciate and see the
perspective of the Western Hemisphere
the US and the rest of its allies when
they were in rush to leave the region
they had their own priorities they
wanted to focus in the other regions of
the globe and they wanted to focus on
Indo Pacific on the rise of China and a
war on Ukraine and now recently the
crisis is in Middle East so Afghanistan
was an abandoned project for them uh but
for us it had realtime tangible
implications and particularly the
gadgets which were given to the afan
Republic army and which unfortunately
were sold into the Black Market has been
transferred to all these non-state
actors and they are challenging it
within our region and my my prediction
is that it will have implications for
the larger Middle East also can you
expand on what those implications may be
well they would be selling it to the all
non actors uh who are present here in
the region uh in the black market for
the money uh until unless there is no uh
broad-based policy to discourage all
such non State actors wherever they
exist as illegitimate and their
activities be it uh economic activity or
their other Enterprises should be
eliminated or curtailed at best is the
region doing enough to respond to those
security concerns that you're outlining
and if not what would you like to see I
think so at the moment uh we are on our
own and we are responding to that
challenge uh there is a requirement of a
regional approach to focus on this
challenge because it would not just
limit itself uh to Pakistan it will have
a spill effect to Central Asia maybe to
other parts of the region larger Middle
East so even at a global level I feel
the strengthening of the structural
level institutional level of Pakistani
state is very much required we need to
enhance the capacity of
counterterrorism we need to encourage
that Pakistan can become a viable
economic entity and a viable democracy
at the same time both uh if uh the
politics of Pakistan is more focused and
its economy is divorced probably uh both
of the ideas wouldn't be able to sustain
uh in a cessed manner the answer in
Pakistan from a domestic perspective to
address this security concern has been
to deport Afghan refugees why do you
believe that makes Pakistan safer well
uh the idea did not revolve thoroughly
around the security challenge the idea
was around uh the West fan State uh any
state which has the Sovereign right uh
to send back or legalize for that matter
the illegal aliens who are residing in
its territory so this was the same kind
of a challenge which Pakistan was facing
and there were people for last four or
five decades and few of them no doubt
were engaged uh with our terrorism
challenge with our crime challenge with
our organized crime Challenge and other
social evils but not all of them I I'm
sorry to interrupt you there prime
minister because the the question that
is being asked here on the ground and
around the world is where do those
people go where do these people gone the
Afghan people where do they go well they
have to go back to their home they have
a home doesn't that exacerbate the
security challenge in the region though
well uh primarily we are responsible for
the security of the population of
pakistanis uh the Region's
responsibility comes at a later stage
the American government is primarily
responsible for the security of the
American population not of the entire
global population yes it does have a
responsible role towards that which
everyone should play but Primacy Primacy
and then the importance which we assign
to is is the security of the Pakistani
population so we did come to that
conclusion that for in order to achieve
that goal we need to send these illegal
aliens who are not not visible in our
database we are not visible in our
system and there is no Perpetual ban on
them if they want to return to the
country they can do by uh receiving
their travel documents from back home
and they can have a regulated movement
towards the side of Pakistan if they
want uh to return if they wish to come
either for a business or a a study
purpose or any other purpose whatever
that is that's how they will be visible
into our system that who they are what
they are doing and the government will
have a vigilante role over such people
have the US actions in Afghanistan
driven Pakistan closer to China both
from an economic and security
perspective no I don't think so it's the
US actions in in Afghanistan but yes
with China we are strategically close uh
we have got a history with the Chinese
and there was a time when the Chinese
and the US were quite close close with
one another when they were containing
the Soviets and that closeness happened
via Pakistan uh the famous cassena um
clandestine trip to Beijing was by
Islamabad so that there is a history of
all three countries being quite close to
one another and then the strategic
competition and the wine uh did change
uh the position of the two and that is
China and us but Pakistan still enjoys
and it remains pretty much close uh to
Chinese uh uh State and uh no matter
what happens in the region either in
Afghanistan or anywhere else that will
not affect our relationship with China
just finally prime minister what is your
message to the Biden Administration as
Pakistan enters these elections in
February uh well Pakistan is a country
of consequence not a country of concern
so we need need uh that Pakistan should
be constructively engaged it's a midsize
power and its uh actual potential and
role needs to be appreciated and that
constructive engagement be it in region
or at a global scale is the requirement
and need of the hour prime minister
thanks for your time thank you so much