your excellency thank you so much for
joining CNBC I want to kick off by
asking you about your trip here to the
World Economic Forum you had the chance
to sit down with President Trump
walk me through how likely you think it
is that the u.s. president can be of use
in terms of Kashmir look I can't say I
can't say what will be the outcome but
for me it is important to try my best
because Kashmir is you know it's a far
more serious problem than people realize
the world realizes the problem is that
India has been taken over by an
extremist ideology which is called
Hinduja or the RSS RSS if you google RSS
founding fathers they were inspired by
the by the Nazis they admired the Nazis
then they admired their racial purity
the sort of they believed in the ethnic
cleansing of Muslim some of the one of
the founding fathers go Alka he's
written about it so therefore that
ideology that had assassinated Matt
mahogany and was declared a terrorist
organization three times has taken over
India and Kashmir is just what they have
done in Kashmir as since 5th August they
basically put 8 million people under
curfew under siege they whisked away all
the political leaders they picked up
teenagers thousands of teenagers taken
out of Kashmir so it's a serious
situation and why do I say it's serious
because I worried that this will now
spill over already there army chief has
given a statement that the Pakistan side
of Kashmir also belongs to India so this
is serious because they're two
nuclear-armed countries that's why I
want President Trump a head of the most
powerful country in the world
he should intervene right now the United
Nations or or President Trump
through the UN at least though this is
what the world bodies came about after
1945 to stop
the sort of a future conflict do you
believe that Prime Minister Modi is
enabling this Prime Minister Modi was a
life member of the RSS I repeat RSS is
an extremist ideology why do I say that
it's important that people in the West
they do not understand this as yet but
if you if you all you have to do is
Google this this ideology you will know
what it is so the danger is that it's a
country of 1.3 billion people
nuclear-armed taken over by this so it's
a nightmare scenario for people like us
who are the neighbors and because of the
Kashmir dispute this could actually
spill over what kind of pressure do you
want the international community to put
on India we're talking about sanctions
what what would the international
community do in similar circumstances
they're all in the United Nations the
Security Council their various ways they
can be be a deterrent stop this sort of
nonsense and what is what's happening in
India they passed these two legislation
and these two legislations have alarmed
the 200 million Muslims living in India
and they're already protests going on in
fact non-muslims have also joined them
minorities have joined them Indian
intellectuals have joined them because
they realize where this is headed
I mean the Nazi Germany between 1930 and
1934 turn from a liberal democracy to a
fascist totalitarian racist state this
is what's happening in India when you
think about this more broadly when we're
talking about an international appeal
here as well I mean think about the
situation in China with the weigert the
international community has really not
done enough by a long haul does that
concern you that a similar situation
could take place in India but in India
they already I mean they they have got
this registration act in an Assam they
sadly deregistered almost 2 million
people now 2 million people out of
they were Hindus so they brought this
other act along duties we're talking
about a genocide potentially in Kashmir
I'm scared because in Kashmir
they have already the stated aim of this
RSS's that they will change the
demography of people of Kashmir Kashmir
is a disputed territory between Pakistan
and India there are 10 or 11 United
Nations resolutions which confirmed that
it's a dispute and the people of Kashmir
through a referendum could decide
whichever country they wanted to join
now that disputed territory has been
annexed by India and they are trying to
change the demography of people of
Kashmir which according to the Fourth
Geneva Convention is a war crime when
you think about what happens next more
broadly in this region beyond Kashmir
there's a lot of concern that we've
heard over the last couple of weeks a
lot of it inside the beltway in
Washington and even in the region that
the Trump administration is maximum
pressure campaign is destabilizing the
Middle East or making it more worrisome
I would say between neighbors do you
think that the US and President Trump is
getting it right when it comes to
dealing with Iran because I know that
you've tried to be a mediator in that
situation you see it'd be a disaster if
this conflict takes place between the
u.s. but he doesn't seem to want it
president Trump you know he keeps
backing away he says that he wants
dialogue do you think he does and that
sensible I mean just look at Afghanistan
it's almost now 19 years there still
we're still finding a solution still
trying to get peace talks going
ceasefire going still people are dying
in Afghanistan this is 19 years over a
trillion dollars spent on it does the
u.s. want another conflict and trust B
Iran will be much much more difficult
conflict than even Afghanistan you've
spent time in Tehran talking about these
issues do you believe that there is a
possibility that they would sit down
with Donald Trump and have a
conversation you know they should they
should people should never rely on
military solutions I mean you go you use
military to solve one problem five other
problems come
unintended consequences whenever you
look back look at look at Vietnam War
you the generals were saying it's only a
few months two months six months six
weeks and look what happened
same with Afghanistan I heard it myself
our own President Musharraf when he
would be when he was joining the US war
on terror he said it'll be only a few
weeks backs to three months look so war
is never a solution
people who try and solve issues through
bloodshed and war you know they they
always cause mayhem in this world a
conflict right now with Iran would be a
disaster for developing countries oil
prices will shoot up countries like us
were just about balancing our budgets
everything will go up and it'll just
cause poverty so I would you know and I
I did say it to press a president Trump
that you know this is war is not the
solution do you think that Tehran would
be open to talking to President Trump
but when I spoke what I I spoke to
President Trump when I was in the US in
September then I went to Tehran spoke to
the president and there the Supreme
Leader I thought they were receptive I
thought they wanted to you know they
were willing to talk when you think
about your role as the prime minister um
there seems to be and correct me if I'm
wrong a bit of an edge for celebrity
politicians like yourself and even
Donald Trump when it comes to
communicating when it comes to opening
those doors and having those kinds of
conversations do you see yourself as a
mediator Prime Minister you see I again
repeat I do not believe in military
solutions this is a you know I'm a
student of history and I just have you
look back in history every time you know
these military solutions took place look
at Napoleon going into Russia then
Hitler going into Russia just look at
all these conflicts for a start they are
always a miscalculation
they always a miscalculation
and then they caused bloodshed on this
earth so I look upon myself as someone
who would always want to be a partner in
peace we joined with twice we joined the
us sort of camp one was when the Soviets
invaded Afghanistan in the 80s then we
again joined the u.s. after 9/11
Pakistan suffered I know the
consequences second time 70,000
Pakistanis were killed in an insane war
and we lost over a hundred billion
dollars to the economy we've just about
recovering from it so from I'm convinced
that people looking for solutions the
only people who benefit is this
industrial military complex when you
think about as well the relationship
that you have with President Trump you
have a good relationship with the
president the relations however between
the security services between Pakistan
and the United States has suffered over
the last several years no doubt over the
last several decades what's it going to
take to build that kind of trust back we
see why did this relationship suffer
between the Pakistan security forces and
the u.s. because I objected
I did not want Pakistan to become part
of this war on terror
after 9/11 because Pakistan and nothing
to do with 9/11
there was no Pakistani involved al Qaeda
was in Afghanistan and I felt you know
why would be going into this war when we
went into the war as time passed
initially there was this romance with
General Musharraf because he was
fighting America's war after a while
when Musharraf could not deliver what
the Americans wanted and he could not
deliver he should never have promised
them that he could deliver what what was
beyond him he could not win America the
war in Afghanistan no one could but they
were they kept asking we shall have to
do more and he kept promising them more
but he couldn't deliver so that's where
the mistrust began this time it is based
on
trust common objectives this time it is
based on the fact that I always believed
that there was no military solution in
Afghanistan and so does President Trump
so now both of us can work for the peace
process and we are trying our best it's
not easy because it's 19 years of this
turmoil that is taking place in
Afghanistan but it is the only way
somehow the Taliban and the Afghan
government they get together and work
out some sort of a political settlement
it is the only way does it worry you
that there are such radically different
ideologies when it comes to women when
it comes to human rights the Taliban
versus the Afghan government I was just
sitting with Austral ani earlier today
and talking about this he was talking
about the potential for peace with the
Taliban it seemed to echo your
statements as well but in terms of what
it means for women in that country does
that worry you see you see I think you
know Indian culture actually it's a very
democratic culture and once they get
together I think they'll work it out
it's not the Taliban of 2001 so much has
water has gone under the bridge some
little girls will be going to school you
think I think so I think that it won't
you will not find them the way they were
in 2001 the circumstances were different
there was that civil war that had taken
place the rape of Kabul has had taken
place by one of the warlords it's not
exactly it's not the same situation now
but I feel that the Afghans our
democratically minded people they will
sit on the table they'll thrash it out
what happens next for Pakistan with
regards to the economy because you've
been able to work with allies in the
region as well as the IMF United States
in terms of trying to give Pakistan a
leg up and get back to the game where
are we today well you know we inherited
a bankrupt and indebted economy but the
huge fiscal and and current account
deficit and it has been a very difficult
year ready to to stabilize the economy
that the rupee our currency lost value
but fortunately it's stabilized and
without any government support it's
found its market bad
and as a result the market sentiment has
gone up our stock market is now the
highest in one year we've a foreign
investment direct investment has arisen
200 percent in one year so we are moving
in the right direction and we are moving
now towards an export-led growth rather
than a consumption led growth or an
import led growth which which is why we
had the same balance and hence go to the
IMF for help this is we sort of
difficult structural reforms but it is
the only way to get out of this boom and
bust syndrome which is which has been
plaguing us for 30 years and I feel that
we are on the right track now the only
thing is people are hurting because of
you know all the measures we've taken
now we want to concentrate on growth
creating jobs for the people what are
the criticisms that I've heard here at
the World Economic Forum speaking to
various business leaders about doing
business in Pakistan you went on quite a
raid in a sense of the business elite in
Pakistan and you held them very much to
account for what a lot of people thought
was cornering the market and corruption
and you're known for that but when
business leaders externally look at that
and say you know this is an incredible
opportunity to make money and to grow
and even to create jobs but at the same
point we don't know that we have the
assurance of the government that their
policies aren't going to change what's
your message to them about doing
business in Pakistan my the the people
who I held responsible were always the
political elite you see if the political
elite is clean then you know they will
not have crony capitalism problem that
happened in Pakistan was that we had
these two political houses and both just
competed in siphoning of money out of
the country money laundering and once
the leadership does that then the whole
system falls apart so it is not the
business community I've been blamed in
fact this is the first government which
has gone out of its way to promote
industrialization in Pakistan since the
60s in 60s Pakistan government actively
industrialization we are we were the
fastest-growing economy and then we lost
our way with nationalization socialist
socialist government came along and then
for someone that mindset never changed
making money was considered a crime
almost now we have we encourage
businesses industry we are doing
everything possible so that people can
make profits so once you make profits
then it becomes like honey for bees to
come investors to invest so this is now
actively a government trying to create
wealth in the country by promoting
industrialization security that's a big
red flag even today for folks who think
about putting their business and in
Pakistan what's the message there have
you got that situation under control
after 9/11 2019 was the most safest year
in Pakistan so after we joined the war
on terror and 9/11 from Goethe 2003
onwards when when we had such security
problems in Pakistan you know the
investors disappeared sports team won't
tour Pakistan but this I'm happy to say
2019 was the safest year we had the
least amount of crime since then and so
it was reflected in tourism in one year
our tourism double rate in 2018-19
tourism double is basically our security
forces controlled this crime terrorism
they have controlled it weaved we've
also taken a confident smarter know this
the security force has paid a huge price
I mean lot of sacrifices in controlling
the crime and you know there was about
eight ten years there we really the
country took a beating but we did we
took another step we decided that the
legacy of 80s where we had created these
militant groups to fight the Soviets
these groups had remained after the
Soviets had left now before my committee
will all the political parties in 2015
took a decision that there would not be
any armed militia in Pakistan and since
then we have disarmed the militias and
rehabilitated them so all that is now
reflected in the figures Pakistan has
become safe ready for business walk me
through the Belton road initiative what
that really means for Pakistan because a
lot of critics would say that this is a
debt trap for Pakistan but I know you
have a different view when the Chinese
came to help us with this Bri and and
the seatback which is the Pakistan China
economic corridor they rape we were
really at the rock bottom and so we are
really grateful to the Chinese that they
came and rescued us they came us they
pumped and even not just they gave us
loans and loans by the way or not
they're barely five or six percent of a
total loan portfolio which is this
nonsense that you know Chinese we are
indebted to China they actually helped
us with investment and and and because
of them it has given us an opportunity
to attract foreign investment we've
created these special economic zones we
just we've opened do and we are opening
more where we are giving special
concessions to industry and then it's
not it's beyond the the the Bri in CPAC
they have also its technology transfer
especially helping us in agriculture
because Chinese technology seed
development is much better than Pakistan
our productivity is very low so and then
skills they are developing skill centers
in Pakistan so they're really helping us
and we're grateful when you look at what
happens next for Pakistan obviously
there's a great deal of cultural history
between Saudi Arabia and Pakistan and
Pakistan and the UAE and other Gulf
nations as well what role do you believe
that your country has to play in that
corridor of Commerce and Industry
because obviously right now so much
concern in the region about what might
happen next with Iran
where do you see the relationship
between Pakistan and the Gulf
government's going
I repeat it'll be a disaster for not
just Pakistan the whole area if there's
a conflict for a start there almost 4
million Pakistani workers in UAE and in
Saudi Arabia who spent who send
remittances which is badly needed
because of an imbalance of trade trade
imbalance so it that would be affected
but apart from that you know the impact
a conflict would have I repeat on the
oil prices it just I mean it would be a
disaster for the whole area so we are
trying our best
I mean Pakistan plays its part you know
we have relationship with Iran with very
close relationship but UAE and Saudi
Arabia so we try and we've done our best
there were tensions when there were
these missile attacks on some oil
facility of Saudi Arabia so we played
our part when to both I went to both
countries and try to defuse the tensions
when you think about the economic
relationships between Pakistan and the
Gulf governments as well you mentioned
the workers but in terms of trade and
other opportunities where do you see
opportunities as yet untouched tourism
Pakistan is is is one place you know it
has it has probably the best mountain
tourism in the world because you know
half of the world's highest peaks over
24,000 feet high in Pakistan and it is
still undiscovered by by mass tourism
then it has it for religious tourism we
have the holiest shrines of Hinduism of
Sikhism of of Buddhism I mean north of
Pakistan is most center of the Ghaderi
Gandhara civilization and then of course
Sufism so that we are we are not
planning to attract make it easy for
tourists to come and you're telling
tourists it's safe to permit Pakistan
today as I said in last one year tourism
double in Pakistan walk me through your
take on this because I mentioned earlier
similar
leaders like President Trump like
yourself you come into office and there
is often criticism you know this is a
person who isn't you know a career
politician this person who doesn't come
from a traditional background are they
really going to be able to get it done
it's been interesting to watch the last
four years of Donald Trump whatever side
of the aisle you sit on whether you love
him or hate him frankly when it comes to
the economy the president has delivered
do you believe you're going to be able
to deliver for Pakistan but let me just
correct you I played professional sport
international cricket for 20 was
necessarily a traditional background for
a politician number I'm saying that I
played international sports for 21 years
which was a long career I been in
politics for 23 years and it was except
for who's the greatest leader of
Pakistan ever had was the great founder
of Pakistan except for him I have the
longest struggle in politics so
President Trump actually has had an easy
ride he came and he became president I
for 22 years I struggled built my own
party is the only time a party has
broken through a two-party system so you
fought for this so struggle more than
sports
I mean sports was only 25 years this is
23 years are you gonna be able to
deliver I think it's the you know the
struggle which I've been through which
which has which equips me basically the
problem we all face and leadership faces
how to cope with the bad times so this
has been a very tough time for me and
all my sporting career I don't think I
have ever faced there's one year of such
problems taking hard decisions watching
people suffer because because of the
hard structural changes so it's been a
very difficult year for me but I would
not have been able to succeed had I not
had that long struggle behind me on the
subject of cricket Ben Stokes great
cricket here yes
he obviously is
I haven't seen mine I must confess I've
hardly seen Crick you've been too busy
because you know the sort of issues I
faced I have really haven't watched much
cricket but from you know I have you not
read papers so he's all clearly a great
cricketer
excellent work thank you so much your
excellency for joining us